[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Wisenthal.
>> Joe, it's that time of year again.
>> Jackson Hall week.
>> It's my favorite time of year.
>> Yeah. So, I mean, it's the it's a great
time of year anyway, but in in Jackson
Hole, Wyoming, come on.
>> For many reasons. Okay, so this is the
uh Kansas City Fed's annual economic
symposium in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, and
they basically get together a bunch of
different, you know, Fed presidents, a
bunch of different speakers on economic
policy, and then everyone geeks out
while looking at mountains. Basically,
>> it's really extraordinary. So, this will
be the third year that we'll have been
there. We were recording this August
18th, but by the time people are
listening to this, the event will have
just will be kicking off. It really is
extraordinary because you really have
the top minds in this stuff from truly
all around the world, but also it's late
summer. People chill, people hike,
people recognize that they're in an
amazing location and they would be
wasting their time if they just spent
the whole time inside talking monetary
policy.
>> This is true. But I think part of the
planning of this event is this idea of
okay, you get everyone out in this
really nice place in the wilderness and
people are maybe a little bit more
forthcoming, maybe a little bit more
open to having creative discussions
about policy. And it's interesting, you
know, you mentioned people talking about
like this year's theme.
>> I have a pop quiz for you, which is, do
you remember the themes from the last
two Jackson Holes that we went to?
>> We've been to this will be our third.
>> I'm a little embarrassed. Is monetary
policy in a changing world? No, I
actually it's a good question. I
>> You're not that far off actually.
>> So last year it was reassessing the
effectiveness and transmission of
monetary policy.
>> The first Jackson Hole we went to in
2023 that was structural shifts in the
global economy. That one I got to say a
little
>> I I could forgive you for forgetting
that one. But this year's theme uh it
just came out you know just got
announced. So this theme is labor
markets in transition, demographics,
productivity, and macroeconomic policy.
It's a good topic for many reasons. So
obviously, you know, the future of AI
and its impact on the labor force will
certainly fit under that particular
thematic umbrella, but also it goes
straight into the heart of what a lot of
Fed policy makers seem to be discussing
right now and arguing, right?
>> All kinds of things, immigration, aging,
etc. How does that bear on the data that
we're seeing right now? It's a great
topic for both the short term and the
long term of monetary policy. So should
be a fascinating conference,
>> right? And so on that note, I'm very
happy to say we do in fact have the
perfect guest. We are going to be
speaking with Jeff Schmidt. He is of
course the president of the Kansas City
Fed and responsible for putting on this
event every year. So Jeff, thank you so
much for coming on A Thoughts.
>> Oh, it's my pleasure. It's great to
finally meet both of you officially and
we follow you quite intently. So it's
really great to be on. We're leaving
that in.
>> That's right. Well, I mean, it is mutual
to be fair because we follow you quite
intently. So, first of all, let me just
extend a personal thanks for putting on
an event which allows Joe and I to go to
one of the most beautiful places on
earth every year. That is truly
wonderful for both of us. And then I
just going back to the theme for a
second.
>> How do you come up with the themes for
these events every year? Is there like a
brainstorming session and everyone goes
into a room and 12 hours later you
emerge with some sort of consensus much
like a FOMC meeting I suppose but
>> yeah it's a great behind baseball
question and as you can imagine you know
we're in our 48th year so every year you
know immediately after it's over we get
in a room and we talk about what went
well what can we make better and I
really give credit to Joe Groover
Groover chief economist and his team
it's it's probably the most
nerve-wracking decision that that has to
be made because, you know, Jackson will
get over in late August and then
probably by sometime early the fourth
quarter, you're you're starting to talk
about what should we create a theme
around for the following year. And so
they actually end up deciding on that by
the end of of the year. And it's
nerve-wracking because you hope that all
the research you've asked these
brilliant people to do and present uh is
applicable by August because you know
how fast things move in the business and
economic world and boy they are so good
at it and they do think forward about
some of the emerging issues that are
going to be dealt with whether it be
with the central bank or with the global
economy and I tell you what they hit a
home run this year because I I'm
actually as a you know economist and Fed
president. I'm very interested in the
dynamic of demographics, not just
nationally, but internationally. There's
things going on that that you'll hear
and and will be presented on Friday and
Saturday that I think are going to
really spur a lot of thinking and a lot
of conversation about how demographic
behaviors and movements move the
workforce and labor force in the US and
and abroad. So, so it is a it's a
tenuous 8 months because you've got, you
know, Nobel level economists doing the
research and preparing these papers
around a topic and I think this one is
really going to hit a really good chord.
It is definitely a great topic for right
now because of you know there's all the
questions at le you know and here just
I'm talking US specifically but as you
mentioned it is a global story because
there is aging and the effect that
that's going to have on the workforce
especially in many advanced economies
and non-advanced economies frankly and
then obviously AI is a huge one and then
in the US specifically changing
immigration policy and so forth just on
the inside baseball part a little bit
more okay so you establish the team
establishes the theme. How do you then
like figure out it's probably almost
anyone I assume would say yes to an
invite to present to Jackson Hole, but
how what is that actual process like
where you identify the presenters that
you're looking for?
>> Yeah. So, here again, as you can
imagine, there's a a community of
economists and researchers. Yeah.
>> Both nationally and abroad. While it's a
big community, it's pretty connected.
And so, the team's going to get together
and they're going to do a couple things.
one is they're going to try to break
down maybe inside the topic what are
some of the nuances of because I think
we have four papers that'll be released
in on Friday and Saturday and so within
that topic there's subtopics and so
you're going to have researchers in
university settings you're going to have
researchers inside of central banks and
a lot of that community is going to kind
of focus itself on certain micro and
macro topics so they have a really good
inventory of experts that they'll reach
out to. And I would say you're right. I
mean, I think in most cases the
researchers would really covet the
opportunity to do this research and
submit the paper, but they're also very
thoughtful about it. You know, some will
just maybe not take the engagement just
because it's not well aligned to the
research that the they're either doing
or they're they feel they're experts at.
But it but by and large it's really a
great honor and we and we t t t t t t t
t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t
t t t t t t t t t t t t t typ typically
a very positive response. The challenge
is time. You know, a lot of these things
might take a year or two to research,
but they have a very tight window once
they're asked and they agree. You know,
they might have to submit within four or
five months. And sometimes when you're
talking about a very macro topic, that
can be a super big challenge for a
researcher. So speaking of challenges,
why don't we get right into more of that
theme, the idea of labor markets in
transition. Why don't you go ahead and
give us your sort of highlevel interest
in this particular topic? I guess how
does something like AI, how does
something like aging demographics, lower
birth rates actually complicate the task
of setting monetary policy, especially
when you think about things like the
neutral rate of interest, RTA star. You
know, our star is a nebulous concept at
the best of times. I can only imagine
what it's like trying to estimate our
star at a time when we're also talking
about, you know, AI potentially
transforming the way everyone on Earth
is working.
>> Yeah. So, let me kind of set the stage
for this because I first of all, my
backgrounds I'm a little bit of a hybrid
Fed president. So, you're going to
typically have maybe Fed presidents that
are in two different camps. One one is
going to be the traditional camp of
economist, PhD, researcher, scholar
really focusing attention on the
monetary policy discussions relating
their their background to making good
decisions at the policy table with the
FOMC. The second is going to be more in
my camp. I'm much more of a
practitioner, not a professor of
economics. I mean, I I've run banks.
I've been a bank supervisor with the
FDIC early in my career. I've done a
little bit of leadership teaching at SMU
the last couple years, but I'll take my
banker experiences through my 30 plus
years of building banks. The most
important part of that is really the
workforce of people that you put
together. And through that 30 years, to
your points, there's really two big
drivers on the demographic end that that
are of interest to me. One is just the
behavioral nature of the labor force
generationally, how they're changing,
how they use technology. I'm a baby
boomer. The 20 to 30ome coming in has a
different sense of what the job is and
how they're going to be successful at
that work. Uh the second thing is just
and there's a very compelling paper
that's going to be released on that
addresses things like fertility rates.
And so that that's not only a national
but that's an international phenomenon
is how does how does the labor force
migrate let's say in the US stateto
state what drives that migration of
labor force and then what's happening in
other large labor ccentric countries
where the fertility rates are actually
affecting the workforce going forward I
mean China is a really stark example
Japan India is something a country I
think everybody's really watching
relative to how their labor force is
maturing, educating, growing. I think
all those dynamics are going to play a
really important piece to the puzzle of
where where are things going to be made
and how our economies going to going to
grow because most economists and people
in the markets would argue you've got to
have a growing labor force for your
economy to grow. And that probably gets
to the next observation you made, I
think, Tracy, and that's how does
technology, maybe specifically
artificial intelligence, weave its way
into this conversation. And you'll see
some really good arguments about maybe
the advent of AI is going to be
perfectly timed for the nature of the
labor force and how it's shifting
because overall when you add fertility
rates and you add labor market at large,
it's pretty static. It's not growing in
a big way. Probably the only areas that
are growing significantly would be India
and maybe the African continent. So all
those things are going to play into this
mix of of both national and global labor
force.
[Music]
So speaking of technology, a couple
weeks ago we interviewed Fed President
Mary Daly. She was talking about the
iPhone and for example that the current
iPhone can do so much more than the
first iPhone, you know, however many
years that go. And then I thought of a
follow-up question to that, but I forgot
to ask her. So I'm like, okay, I'm just
going to ask the next Fed president that
I So I'm asking you the question that I
actually should be asking Mary Dailyaly.
I apologize for the unfairness but I
think this could inform the AI
discussion which is that we have seen
already setting aside AI these
incredible tech advances undeniable that
have changed the world right no one
would deny that and yet measured
productivity gains have not been
particularly extraordinary. So if you
look at like since the first iPhone or
the from the pre iPhone era to now the
world's changed dramatically on account
of the technology changes and yet
productivity nothing particularly
special at least in the data and I'm
curious like when you think about the
effect of AI. Do you have any sort of
theory for why that is or why it is that
these obvious technological
breakthroughs haven't actually moved the
dial in some of these important
measures?
Well, I have some personal thoughts,
maybe some observations within the Fed
itself, at least with the Kansas City
Fed. One is just be patient. You know,
there a lot of things are happening. I
think a lot of this technology is
emerging now. Now granted it'll go fast
but the adoption I mean even I think
about the Kansas City Fed itself you
know getting comfortable with the what's
kind of embedded inside let's say the AI
technology
you know the thing I worry a lot about
is just things like copyright laws what
you know that we're sensitive to using
that technology and is it safe for us to
use as we try to figure out ways to be
more productive inside our bank from a
more macro standpoint. I think
everybody's trying to figure out I would
kind of categorize the AI phenomena
today as kind of a low fruit to high
fruit process. So what everybody's
trying to do is say what are the what's
the nature of job of things inside my
job that actually can make me more
productive just inherently more
productive. whe whether it be narrative
in a legal brief or let's say taking a
bank examination report and trying to
download things that would normally take
you hours or days to populate an
examination report with. I think we're
at that kind of cross roads where we're
trying to figure out what's the easy low
fruit and then I think over time I don't
know if you're going to get this blast
of productivity that all of a sudden
it's this moment of epiphany. I think
you're going to I think it's actually
perfectly timed because over time I
think you're going to be able to
integrate this technology and you're
going to figure out where it it's best
used. Now granted and people are doing
studies on this. There are some jobs
that that I think I'll give Mary Dailyy
credit. She coined the phrase soul
sucking jobs. What are the things that
people are, let's say, more monotonous
or boring or things that just don't move
needles that aren't like super
interesting and challenging? And I think
you're going to see that's going to be
the part of the low fruit process. The
upper half of the tree, I think you
might see some real productivity gains.
But it but in the end when you see
shifts in like immigration policy and
you see uh workforces not growing you're
actually going to need to integrate that
technology to keep a balance in the
supply and demand. I I think uh chair
Paul mentioned this in his last
conference after the FOMC when he was
addressing the some of the data that
came out in the workforce in the summer
and some of the adjustments that while
it was a little bit eye opening, we feel
like there's a balancing in supply and
demand of the labor force today and and
it's probably why you're not seeing at
least today a major uptick in the
unemployment rate. It's it's kind of
rebalancing itself going into the next
couple quarters.
>> This was going to be exactly my next
question since you brought up
immigration. Why don't you go ahead and
tell us what you're seeing in the labor
market right now? Cuz the debate that
seems to be emerging is that yes, we've
seen these big revisions to payrolls
recently. But on the other hand, if we
have a lot of people exiting the
workforce because they're aging out of
it or because of new immigration
policies, then maybe that break even
labor rate doesn't really matter as much
anymore and we can tolerate it as long
as the employment rate stays pretty
strong and we are pretty close to full
employment levels still. Yeah.
>> So, what are you seeing now? How would
you characterize it?
So Tracy, I would say that there was a
bit of a convergence of things in the
first and second quarter. So when we
talk about being data dependent, there's
two buckets of data that that I really
focus on. One is the kind of the hard
data that's issued by third parties or
internally by by government agencies,
things that would that they track and
have tracked for a long long time that
emerge with things like unemployment
rates. The second bucket is really my
travels in and around the 10th district.
We're seven states, 20 million people
and businesses trying to get four
cornered in the district to try to get
as much real time information. And so
the convergence, the way I see it, I
think a couple things were at odds in
some of the information and data that
was that emerged here in the last month
or two. The first is that there there
was a lot, you know, we heard the the
word uncertainty everywhere we went. You
you got a change of administration. You
got some big policy rocks. You had a a
budget that was being debated. All those
things create uncertainty in in in a
business person's mind, right? The
second thing was a major change in
immigration policy. And so that that
created its own set of uncertainties and
dynamics. And I think what we're
finding, or at least what we're seeing
in the 10th district, is a lot of those
things converged over a very short
period of time. And what normally will
happen, and this kind of gets me back to
my banker days, is businesses will
actually they'll slow their decisioning
down. They'll, let's say, freeze hiring
for a time. They'll be a little bit more
conservative with their spend on certain
things. And so I actually think that
affected some of the labor numbers that
came out. In the most recent tabletops
we've done with businesses. They seem to
be digesting a lot of that that change
and those changes. In the last couple
weeks, I've seen a level of confidence
back in both the business sectors and
some of the discussions about labor and
workforce. So, we'll see. I mean, I I
would expect maybe a bit of a rebound in
some of the labor statistics, but but at
the end of the day, it really is about
balancing the supply and demand of of
the labor force and what emergence from
that over the next uh I'd say a couple
quarters. It's interesting you talk
about maybe people feeling slightly more
comfortable at least relatively to
compared to the beginning of the year
recently because I've seen some chatter
about maybe an economic reaceleration
right now. You know, some of the tariffs
have now been finalized. It looks so far
like we haven't had that huge
inflationary uptick. Although, of
course, producer prices that we saw last
week maybe tell a slightly different
story. We did have that retail spending
report out on Friday that showed people
were still spending quite a lot of
money. Yeah. Do you see signs of a a
sort of like recovery or reaceleration
at the moment?
>> I don't know. I mean, we got good GDP
numbers kind of a bit of a rebound uh
sling back in the second quarter from
the first quarter's weakness and that
had a lot of noise in it the first
quarter. I think I don't know if I'd
necessarily categorize it as a rebound.
I think that they're they're just
there's a lot of things that are kind of
working themselves through. I mean,
you've got a major major cycle change
with a new administration with a lot of
really
interesting macro ideas that they're
putting in place. And you know, I think
you could make a fair argument that a
lot of those are progrowth types of
policies and processes and programs. So
I think the nature of what we see in
both the labor data and the inflation
data are going to be pretty interesting
and I and there's a lot yet to emerge
between even this week and and our
September FOMC meeting. But but I I
think the nature of how people are
thinking about the economy, what the
markets are, how they're performing
there there is a an optimism I think
shift from it wasn't that they were down
in the first couple quarters. they just
weren't sure and so they there there was
some pausing happening and then I think
uh we're sensing that the nature of the
next couple cycles as we get into the
holiday seasons uh toward the end of the
year there just seems to be a pretty
good optimism about about what's going
to happen in the next couple quarters.
Let me ask you a question about the
latest jobs report that actually sort of
ties near-term cyclical story with the
broader term theme of the conference
which is that the two sectors that
basically in the most recent jobs report
the two sectors that basically added all
of the jobs were health care and social
assistance. And these sectors basically
add employment virtually every month
without fail. And it's very easy to
connect that to aging because people who
are elderly or retired need a certain uh
type of you know nurses and so forth to
take care of them. But these aren't
considered to be particularly high
productivity jobs. Looking in the medium
term, do you worry about this like how
much of the productive labor force will
be necessary to essentially take care of
old people and what that means for
productivity overall.
So when we kind of interview a lot of
our health care professionals in the
district, there is a still a huge demand
need in that sector. And so I think
there's a big up potential in
specifically in the healthcare industry.
And and here again, I'm a baby boomer.
So I'm using more of those services. And
and as you do experience that, you do
see that there there's a real demand
need for health care professionals in in
kind of all spectrums of that industry.
And so I do think that there there are
pockets by industry that could still use
a lot of labor talent. I'd say
healthcare, certain agricultural
industries in the 10th district. There's
certainly some technology and
manufacturing that I think could you
could see a bit of nice growth in over
the next several quarters. So So I I
think what's going to be interesting and
kind of getting a little bit back to the
AI conversation, Yeah. is I think the
nature of of jobs inside industries is
going to change. So we talk a little bit
about this in in the Reserve Bank is we
just launched a new five-year strategic
plan and embedded in the plan is really
to reexplore the skill sets that are
necessary to make this plan happen. And
I think the things that we used to be
doing the last 5 or 10 years need to be
shifted to something else to stay a
high-erforming reserve bank. So, so I do
believe in in a lot of these industry
areas with I think healthc care being at
the top of the list. I think you're
going to see a reskilling in a lot of
these job areas as some of the jobs that
can be done by a more artificial
intelligence technology are going to
shift to much more let's say
intellectual or behavioralbased
job skills going forward. So, so I think
here again, I think that's the message I
I I give to our business associates in
our in the 10th district is tell us how
you're reskilling your workforce because
I think that's where AI is going to
really play a big role. You can't be
static in the job you're doing. You have
to reimagine that job with new
technologies. You know, you mentioned
markets earlier and clearly there's a
lot of enthusiasm about AI still in the
markets and that's one of the reasons
we've seen stocks, you know, hovering
around all-time highs and credit spreads
are now at what, like a 30-year low
basically.
talk to us about where you see rates at
the moment in terms of their
restrictiveness because some of your
fellow Fed presidents will say that they
think rates are still restrictive and
then when I look at something like
credit spreads at you know a three
decade low I think actually this doesn't
look that restrictive to me
>> and with inflation still above target
inflation still above target how
restrictive are rates at the moment
>> yeah it's a it's a great question and
I've been very public. I believe they're
I would call them modestly restrictive.
They're not overly restrictive. And I
think that what we have to be careful of
is kind of rebasing our decisioning on
rates. And and I think the markets do
this cuz look, I'm a former banker.
Bankers and bank clients, they love low
credit rates. Uh they like lower rates
because they can perform better on their
capital base. So I I understand that
piece, but there but I think we talk
about being rangebound to a degree. I I
like to think about, you know, I love
the '9s, right? So, if you think about
how hard the 80s were as we emerged into
the '9s, we had a technology surge and
and if you watched or looked at the
nature of the economy, it performed
really well, but there were monetary
policy was a became a bit of a wave. So
you would start to make decisions where
if you saw things happening in either
the you know your your dual mandate your
you know keeping stable prices and full
employment you would adjust that policy
rate and when things got maybe a little
bit hotter and then as they cooled you
bring them down but it was a nice
rangebound process for me the experience
of the last let's say two or three
shocks. So you had the '08 shock, you
had the 2020 pandemic shock. You know,
you're pushing rates down to dimminimous
levels. You probably don't want rates
down there that low because if if
they're down there that low, you're
trying to pick something off its back.
And so you're trying to create a rate
environment that creates stimulus. So I
think right now we seem to be in a
really good place. And so, you know, it
almost becomes more difficult in the
debate on rates whether they should be
higher or lower when you're at the
margin versus when you're trying to use
monetary policy as more of a blunt force
in instrument to try to pound a high
inflation rate down like we did in in
the 22 23 cycle. So it's it's actually
going from kind of a a blunt force tool
to actually more surgical and then the
debate gets very interesting about where
that you should turn those dials
relative to the data that you're seeing.
So it actually becomes more difficult
when you get on the margin in that
rangebound area versus when you're
trying to really sledge the economy on
the inflation side down. So Tracy
mentioned that estimating the neutral
rate of interest is a sort of difficult
concept in any period. But there is this
view that the neutral rate of interest
today in 2025 is significantly higher
than it was in 2019. And probably some
of the best evidence for that is the
fact that even though the market is
anticipating rate cuts in the short term
over the next couple of years that the
long-term rates still fairly elevated
curves steepen higher rates for longer.
What changed? What's the difference
between 2025 and 2019 such that it looks
like the neutral neutral rate of
interest is so much durably higher?
>> Yeah, Joey, it this is really
interesting science with the policy side
of of our mandate. We have some some
influence on the short end of the curve,
right? So, but so taking the long end,
the whole concept of the long rate, it
has what we call term premiums in it,
right? you and you have to kind of sub
>> Joe doesn't believe in the term premium
for the record but I do
>> I'm not sure I I I don't I don't know if
I believe in it but I I think there are
pieces of a long rate that have sections
of it that the market is going to try to
digest.
>> Can I just say Tracy thinks that I'm a
complete crank but every once in a while
we get a guest who's like you know
there's something to join.
>> No no no every once we get a guest who
will say you know it's a nuance thing
which it is. We all agree. All right,
keep going. Keep going.
>> Okay. So, so the so what I I try what
I'm trying to do with let's say the
concept of the long end of the curve is
you've got issues of okay, some of the
markets going to say they're going to be
influenced by the prospect of inflation
because you have to build a a price into
the long rate for inflation. Some of
them are going to say it's a demand and
supply issue with the debt that's trying
to be financed, both government and
private debt. the nature of that long
rate. There's pieces of it that are
going to influence it. It's interesting.
You know, I talk about the Fed balance
sheet quite a bit. It's hard to second
guessess what we did in the '08 and 2020
cycle with our balance sheet relative to
trying to keep the long rate somewhat in
submission. So actually the duration of
our balance sheet is influencing the
long rate to some extent which I think
is in a positive way. So when you think
about it the treasury duration is about
four or five years. The our balance
sheets about a little over eight years
in duration. So that's that quantitative
twisting that people talk about. So
we're actually influencing the long rate
a little bit in our balance sheet in a
positive way. But I think over time, as
long as the market believes that debt
can be financed and there's not a lot of
inflation expectation, you're seeing the
long end of the curve drift downward.
[Music]
So, I'm gonna go to what I think, you
know, what is maybe the the hot button
topic of the moment. The formal theme of
this year's Jackson Hole is of course
about the labor market and various
trends. The subtext theme, and I think
this is going to be a lot of interest,
is the attacks on the Fed and concerns
about central bank independence. Just to
your point about what's driving that
long end of the curve, if there are
concerns that the political will is no
longer there to keep an independent
central bank, if there are concerns that
in the future that the Fed will more be
at the beck and call of elected
officials, could that also be a factor
in driving up the long end of the curve
as investors may rationally presume that
a future Fed may not be as committed to
stable prices as the current Fed?
Wow, that's uh that's deep, Joe.
Actually, there's so much there's such
an onion in what you
>> I know, I know, but I'm trying. But the
So, strip away all of my throat
clearing, which I felt was necessary.
>> If there is concern that there is no
longer the political will to maintain an
independent central bank, that there is
concern that a future Fed may not be as
committed to inflation fighting as it
ought to be to keep that 2% goal. Could
that be a factor driving up rates at the
long end?
>> Peel the onion for us. we have time.
>> Okay.
>> So, the quick answer is I don't know. I
I guess I wouldn't I don't see or hear
that. Acknowledge the debate.
>> Yeah,
>> Joe. And and I believe look, our country
is going to be 250 years old next year.
It's still the great experiment. It's
built on words legislation and and and
what's fascinating to me is
>> the the issue of Fed independence, it's
codified, right? So, it you know, we
have a mandate. It's legislative. It
that that that legislative authority can
shift and change. But it's hard to argue
the the efficacy of of the independence
piece. I mean, I think there's a bit of
perfection in me being able to go to a
table with 18 other really committed and
bright people to try to keep this
economy on a level rail. You know, I I I
talk to people about the economy being
this big, very massive train, the
largest, most powerful train economic
train in the world, $30 trillion. And
you've got administration and a Congress
that really is running the train. We're
the American people are are riding on
that train. Now, for the Fed, the Fed is
not the train. The Fed is actually the
rails. It it simplifies the to me to
think about the two rails being, you
know, stable prices and and full
employment. And for us, it's really it
helps us not to have to worry about the
market or the politic of things to to
try to keep the rail steady and level so
that train can go fast. And so the
nature of of what we do in those two
rails and the decisioning we do is
really more balancing than it is trying
to shoot towards some predetermined
place. We know 2% is a good place to be
for inflation. We I think time has
tested that. We know full employment is
a really very positive friction to the
stable price mandate. So, kind of
getting back to the independence thing,
healthy friction in the conversation
just makes the republic stronger in my
opinion. So, I'm happy with the debate.
I'm happy to express it, but frankly,
it's it's less important that I express
it is what you and your listeners
believe that independence does to this
to the decisioning of that massive
economy. I think it works. I think you
you see other countries that that
disentangle it to the body politic and I
think it's very difficult to keep
economies level set when you don't have
that independence piece.
>> Well, on this topic, let me ask I guess
a blunter independence question because
Joe's right that this is you know this
is the unofficial theme of the
conference I think and you yourself have
previously stressed the importance of
Fed independence.
So are there steps that the Fed should
be taking in order to, you know, not
necessarily improve its independence or
even protect its independence, but to
convince people like us and the markets
that it is truly making decisions
independently.
>> So the proof is in the pudding about,
you know, how is our policy action
affecting the level setting of those
rails? And so, look, we should be held
to task that are we making decisions
that are rationalized on sound data and
that they are in compliance with the
congressional mandates that we have. And
so, we are kind of duty bound to that
framework. And so I would say there's a
measure of perfection in the fact that
even in the Fed's structure where you've
got seven board of governors and 12
reserve bank presidents where the nature
of just how those individuals are seated
uh with let's say Senate confirmation, a
white house nomination for the board of
governors and then the 12 reserve banks
having their own inmarket in district
boards that really kind of act as a
balance
to the whole independence architecture.
So I I actually think that the nature of
how it was structured in 1913 is still
effective today. We're just continuing
to learn about how to make policy better
relative to what to the cycles in the
economy. Think about the 20s and 30s.
Think about the 1970s and 80s cycle.
We're still learning as a body to to get
this right because we've got this
amazing economy 30 trillion of 100
trillion and we're if we're healthy the
globe can be healthy and that's the way
I see our our role and that's why I
think independence matters.
>> All right, I have another question that
I forgot to ask Mary Daily and now it's
and I've been thinking about it and I
was like okay now you're here. At the
most recent Fed decision, there were two
descents which is not you know crazy
happen descents happen but they're like
fairly rare etc.
>> Why are dissents rare? How would you
articulate why desents are rare? Because
I think this again could be relevant in
the future depending on who the next Fed
chair is. Are they rare because
generally speaking you and your
colleagues roughly arrive at the same
view of what's appropriate policy or are
they rare because historically when
there is some marginal difference the
regional Fed presidents and the other
governors tend to defer to the judgment
of the chair.
>> Yeah, it's I love that that question and
so I I'd maybe frame it in a couple
ways. One is I think in a lot of ways
descents are healthy. I think there are
times when we we get kind of criticized
as is being kind of fed speak you know
that that they're always aligned that
doesn't make sense
>> like one there two is rare sometimes
there's one frequently as there is so
what's the reason why generally speaking
they are pretty rare
>> so so here again we're at the margin on
things like the policy rate today so the
data could shift people's opinions one
way the other on the dual mandate
relative to their vote on on disscent or
not. So I think the two dissents were
fairly rational public statements about
concern about the labor the labor market
and the labor force. I you know there
was great debate and so you're trying to
figure out where do you settle on the
debate. The other influence really is
the chair. I I've worked with Jerome
Powell for a couple years now. I I he's
a principled. He's committed. I think he
appreciates in his background and
experience trying to collaborate with
people at the table to get a sense of
where they are in their their opinions
of of where the economy is and where the
policy rate should be and I've really
enjoyed working with them and we don't
always agree but at the nature of once
you get to the table you've got to make
a decision and I think that you just
have to have good data good background
good discussions in your district about
where do you think that the policy rate
should go and I and so I think it really
does it's healthy discussion and at
times I suppose it's going to be a vote
of disscent a time or two but I we're in
the margin play now relative to where
that policy rate should be.
>> Okay. So speaking of where the policy
rate should go and healthy discussion
obviously there's a lot of stuff
happening between now and the September
meeting. We have the Jackson Hole
Economic Symposium itself. We have a
couple more big data points. What
specific data or developments would
signal to you that perhaps it is time to
start, you know, really thinking or
advocating for that rate cut? What are
you watching out for?
>> Yeah. So, I'd be watching what a lot of
us watch. You know, some of the
inflation data. There's quite a bit of
it going to come out in the next four or
five weeks. Certainly, we're going to be
very determined to network our inside
the 10th district about what's happening
inside labor, the workforce, just try to
get a a better be on where unemployment
is and supply and demand where that is.
So, I think those are the principal data
points. Then I think that there's that's
what's beautiful about the Jackson Hole
timing. I think there's going to be a
lot of discussion not just domestically,
but internationally. I mean, we've got
150 people, experts in their own right,
central bankers, the some of those most
amazing economists on the globe, all
four corners, just to get a a
calibration of where everybody is just
globally. And I think we'll be able to
emerge with solid decisioning in
September. We'll see where that goes.
Like I said, I when I put everything in
the basket, it just seems like like
we're in a pretty good place right now.
But look, that data can shift and change
and we're in kind of as I mentioned kind
of the nuance of the range of where we
want to be with policy rate and we'll
see where where it goes in September.
>> My last question is I'm and it's
basically just a restatement of Tracy's
earlier question, but I'm still trying
to wrap my head around this. is, you
know, Americans have experienced years
of above target inflation. It's still
running a little warm. As Tracy
mentioned, stock markets at all-time
high, credit spreads very low, and
again, inflation still warm. And you
also say that you think the labor market
is all right. It's fine, and that maybe
businesses have a little of confidence.
Just articulate what is it therefore
that's restrictive or even even modestly
restrictive about the current stance?
Well, so you're I think
>> how do you how do you how do you
demonstrate that it's restricted?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, so there look, there's a
lot of market opinion about kind of the
nature of where the policy rate is to
say let's say where the 2-year Treasury
is and just that, you know, everybody
has kind of the they get go back to this
whole neutral rate conversation, right?
>> Which I think has some value. I mean,
the RSTAR processes of value. There's
going to be some really interesting
discussion on the Taylor rule. I mean,
some of the Taylor rule dated today
would suggest that maybe rates ought to
be a little higher. Uh so that we're
going to I think we're going to really
bear down on the nature of how
restrictive things might be. And but to
your point, Joe, with all the data sets
that you just espoused along with the
dual mandate data sets, it just seems
like we're in a pretty good place. I I I
don't think we should not talk about
would there be a scenario where rates
could go higher on the policy side. The
PPI was a bit eye opening. We'll see
where uh the CPE comes in and in later
here in August and September. Not that
that necessarily it needs to go higher,
but I you have to be willing to anchor
yourself inside those mandates. So if in
fact you see something that needs more
restriction, you should shouldn't be
unafraid to act. That's our job. So So
we'll we'll see. But right now, it seems
like we're in a good place. By the way,
we we brought that policy rate down 100
basis points since a year ago. So it's
not like we haven't moved it. And the
yield curve seems to be in a pretty good
place, too. And so I I don't know. I I
like I like what I'm seeing right now
with a bit of caution on let's just keep
our eye on this inflation number as they
emerge.
>> So I have one more question because I
realize it would be bad if we had you on
and we didn't ask you at least one
banking question given your uh previous
career history but the other forgotten
theme of our macroeconomic policy moment
is quantitative tightening. Right? QT is
still going on in the background and
recently we've seen use of the RRP the
repo facility going to less than 50
billion and so people are talking again
about are we getting to a point where we
are going to see bank reserves start to
drop and maybe they will become scarce.
I know the Fed has been watching this.
Is funding on your radar at the moment?
Is there a possibility that we do start
to see some signs of additional stress
in the funding market?
Okay. So, I would say that right now
there there's a I think a general
consensus that we are in an abundant
reserves policy framework, but there's
also debate on both the size of the Fed
balance sheet and the size of the
reserves in the system. There's actually
very good debate relative to the cost or
non-cost of ample or abundant reserves
in the system. Is it does it create an
inefficiency? Does it create too much of
a footprint of the Fed into the markets?
I will say that I'm I'm encouraged that
we're in a project now that's I think
going to going to modernize the discount
window process. So I think there's an
opportunity where the Fed as the
nation's central bank can make the
activities inside the discount window
much more fungeable and much easier for
banks to access. And I think you could
start to see in the in future years
where reserves and discount window act
or react in a positive way where you can
actually see a a smaller footprint of
reserves where banks are much more
comfortable having the backs stop and
having a much much easier way to access
reserves through the discount window and
other tools as a way to make the market
comfortable that there's plenty of
liquidity in the system. So I'm excited
about that. It's very timely that we do
that because here again two years ago we
launched Fed now. So I think what's the
other fascinating thing about the
ecosystem of banking is we are moving to
an instant payment economy. I mean,
you're starting to see even businesses
start to think about paying people every
day, you know, and just the nature of of
of how we move money instantly, 7 days a
week, 24 hours a day. The nature of that
is really going to be a very interesting
dynamic and it's going to be necessary
for the central bank to be accommodative
to the immediiacy of of that money
movement. And so I'm I'm excited about
some of the conversations we're having
to make that to make our system of money
movement much more modern.
>> All right. Well, Jeeoff, we're going to
have to end it there. We could go on
forever, but we'll save some of it for
in person at Jackson Hole, I suppose.
Great. I really look forward to that.
>> Yeah. Thank you so much.
>> Thank you so much for coming on and
giving us a preview. And we'll see you
in Wyoming.
>> You're welcome. See you there.
[Music]
Joe, there was a lot to pick out of that
conversation and it was a really good
preview of I think what's going to be
like hot button topics um at the event
itself, but one sentence kind of jumped
out at both of us I think which is the
idea that well you know there are
scenarios where interest rates you could
argue interest rates should be higher
here. H that was a little bit
interesting and he phrased it in an
interesting way and I have to like go
back to the tape because there was like
I think a double negative in there but I
mean look you said it stocks are record
high credit spreads are record low he
characterized maybe we've already seen
the worst of the labor market momentum
for 2025 with the unemployment rate
still in the low fours and inflation is
still warm
>> well I know he also he pushed back on
the specific use of re economic
reaceleration that
But it is true. We have seen in addition
to some of the data like turning
negative or showing a slowdown, we have
seen some of the data start to tick up
at least compared to like recent months.
>> So this is an interesting thing. We got
that recent jobs report and you say oh
we're like slowing down. But uh when we
did our recent episode with Scand, he
made the good point like well actually
maybe that data was weak because that
was the immediate post tariff volatility
and you slam the brakes on the hiring
and so forth. And assuming that the
uncertainty measures have come down
certainly since the middle of April, it
is plausible that we've already seen the
softest labor market of 2025.
Mhm.
>> Anyway, lots of interesting there. And I
think like it's a really good theme. I
mean, to a good theme for this year's
conference because it does feel like
some of the things that are happening
immediately right now also intersect
with long-term defines. And so there's a
lot of moving parts.
>> It's it's one of those conference themes
that is not just like theoretical, you
know, 10 or 20 years in the distance.
It's sort of like
>> it's very much now. And on that note,
you know, we're going to have some good
episodes that we record with people who
are presenting papers on those topics.
>> Very excited. So listeners should uh be
prepared for much Jackson Hole content
to come.
>> Yeah. All right. Shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Dash Bennett
at Dashbot and Kale Brooks at
Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content, go
to bloomberg.com/odlots
where the daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we go to Jackson Hole, then please
leave us a positive review on your
favorite podcast platform. And remember,
if you are a Bloomberg subscriber, you
can listen to all of our episodes
absolutely adree. All you have to do is
find the Bloomberg channel on Apple
Podcast and follow the instructions
there. Thanks for listening.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.